Update reference docs to detail universal deletion policy (#17445)
GoogleCloudPlatform/magic-modules: docs/content/best-practices/deletion-policy.md

---

> title: "Deletion Policy"

Reviewer: nit: use sentence capitalization https://developers.google.com/style/headings#syntax-and-capitalization

```suggestion
title: "Deletion policy"
```

> weight: 20

Reviewer: redirect from old page

```suggestion
weight: 20
aliases:
- /best-practices/deletion-behaviors
```

---

> This page documents how to work with the `deletion_policy` field present in nearly all provider resources.

Reviewer: Needs a header

```suggestion
# Deletion policy

This page documents how to work with the `deletion_policy` field present in nearly all provider resources.
```

{{% tabs "schema" %}}
{{< tab "MMv1" >}}

> By default, existing and new resources should support `deletion_policy` without any complication or changes needed by a contributor. A handful of options are available to customize the implementation as necessary.

Reviewer: nit: Avoid should - it's ambiguous. This is an expected result, so you can just state the result. https://developers.google.com/style/prescriptive-documentation#word-choice

I think you can simplify / restructure this sentence a bit for clarity. I'd also recommend adding a sentence here about the globally-available values.

```suggestion
MMv1 resources support `deletion_policy` out of the box without any complication or changes needed by a contributor.

There are three values allowed on every `deletion_policy` field:
- `PREVENT`: This will block deletion of the resource.
- `ABANDON`: Deletion of the resource will remove it from Terraform state but not from the API.
- `DELETE`: Deletion of the resource will remove it from Terraform state and from the API.
```

> ##Updating the default value of `deletion_policy` for a resource

Reviewer: here and elsewhere: you need a space after the hashes; this doesn't render properly otherwise.

```suggestion
## Updating the default value of `deletion_policy` for a resource
```

All resources will use a value of "DELETE" by default if unspecified, but this default can be changed to another value by including the following:
```yaml
deletion_policy_default: "PREVENT" #this can be any string
```

> This is how resources should be modified for implementing default deletion protection guards going forward.

Reviewer: "Going forward" implicitly refers to how it happened in the past. I think it would be more clear to just say what the current state is.

Per https://developers.google.com/style/prescriptive-documentation#word-choice, this might be considered a "recommended action".

```suggestion
We recommend setting the default value to `PREVENT` for resources where it's important to protect against accidental deletion.
```

Alternatively, maybe just "Set the default value..." because it's a standard step, not just recommended.

> ##Supporting a custom value for deletion_policy

Author: ```suggestion
## Supporting a custom value for deletion_policy
```

If implementing support for additional values such as "FORCE", the following steps can be taken.

> Add a `pre_delete` constant to the `custom_code` block in the resource YAML file, that performs the logic with the corresponding value. Example implemention here: [#1](https://github.com/GoogleCloudPlatform/magic-modules/FEATURE-BRANCH-universal-deletion-policy/mmv1/products/datastream/PrivateConnection.yaml#L44), [#2](https://github.com/GoogleCloudPlatform/magic-modules/blob/FEATURE-BRANCH-universal-deletion-policy/mmv1/templates/terraform/pre_delete/private_connection.go.tmpl)

Reviewer: The first link is broken; also, we're going go delete the feature branch at some point. Could these be permalinks (that is, including SHAs) for examples currently on the main branch?

I'd also recommend using `example 1, example 2` because they'll be larger & easier to click.

> Add a `pre_delete` constant to the `custom_code` block in the resource YAML file, that performs the logic with the corresponding value. Example implemention here: [#1](https://github.com/GoogleCloudPlatform/magic-modules/FEATURE-BRANCH-universal-deletion-policy/mmv1/products/datastream/PrivateConnection.yaml#L44), [#2](https://github.com/GoogleCloudPlatform/magic-modules/blob/FEATURE-BRANCH-universal-deletion-policy/mmv1/templates/terraform/pre_delete/private_connection.go.tmpl)

Author: ```suggestion
Add a `pre_delete` constant to the `custom_code` block in the resource YAML file, that performs the logic with the corresponding value. Example implemention here: [Example #1](https://github.com/GoogleCloudPlatform/magic-modules/blob/03e57f68a1f8fa32923d87c224049fb3ac4802e1/mmv1/products/datastream/PrivateConnection.yaml#L49), [Example #2](https://github.com/GoogleCloudPlatform/magic-modules/blob/c5ef760d4e089ca073ca1e40134dda60a7b81096/mmv1/templates/terraform/pre_delete/private_connection.go.tmpl#L1)
```

> Custom values should be specifically tested to verify their implementation works and does not disrupt the usage of the global values "PREVENT", "ABANDON", and "DELETE".

Reviewer: nit: avoid "should"

```suggestion
Add [acceptance tests](https://googlecloudplatform.github.io/magic-modules/test/test/#add-an-acceptance-tests) for any custom values to verify their implementation works and does not disrupt the usage of the global values "PREVENT", "ABANDON", and "DELETE".
```

> 

Reviewer 2: Maybe it's obvious, but it's important that custom deletion policies should be specifically tested. Since the expectation is that the non-custom ones won't be usually.

In the resource YAML, the following also should be included so documentation can be provided to explain the custom values.
```yaml
deletion_policy_custom_docs: true
```

> This attribute will prevent the default universal deletion policy field documentation from being generated. A custom field description can instead be generated by adding a virtual field with the `exclude: true` attribute set, similar to the following, to the resource YAML file. 

Reviewer: I think this might be a bit more direct/clear & avoids "should".

```suggestion
In the resource YAML, set `deletion_policy_custom_docs: true` to prevent the default universal deletion policy field documentation from being generated. Then, add a virtual field with the `exclude: true` attribute set to generate documentation. For example:
```

Reviewer: As a side note, this feels a bit hacky; is it a temporary fix?

```yaml

> virtual_fields:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
deletion_policy_custom_docs: true
virtual_fields:
```

  - name: 'deletion_policy'
    description: |
      The deletion policy for the private connection. Setting `FORCE` will also delete any child
      routes that belong to this private connection. Setting `DEFAULT` will fail the delete if
      child routes exist. Defaults to `FORCE` for backwards compatibility.

      When a 'terraform destroy' or 'terraform apply' would delete the resource,
      the command will fail if this field is set to "PREVENT" in Terraform state.
      When set to "ABANDON", the command will remove the resource from Terraform
      management without updating or deleting the resource in the API.
      When set to "DELETE", the command will behave as if set to "DEFAULT".
    type: String
    exclude: true
```

> ##Excluding a resource from universal deletion_policy

Author: ```suggestion
## Excluding a resource from universal deletion_policy
```

If a resource is incompatible with `deletion_policy` the following can be added to the resource YAML file, and all related code will not be generated:
```yaml
deletion_policy_exclude: true
```
{{< /tab >}}
{{< tab "Handwritten" >}}

> All handwritten resources need to support `deletion_policy` unless deemed incompatible. The following code snippets need to be included in a resource to support this. If following steps under [Add Resource]({{< ref "/develop/add-resource/#handwritten" >}}), they should be included in your resource go file already. 

Reviewer: for the rest of this section - could you evaluate usages of "should" per https://developers.google.com/style/prescriptive-documentation#word-choice

> All handwritten resources need to support `deletion_policy` unless deemed incompatible. The following code snippets need to be included in a resource to support this. If following steps under [Add Resource]({{< ref "/develop/add-resource/#handwritten" >}}), they should be included in your resource go file already. 

Author: ```suggestion
All handwritten resources need to support `deletion_policy` unless deemed incompatible. The following code snippets need to be included in a resource to support this. If following steps under [Add Resource]({{< ref "/develop/add-resource/#handwritten" >}}), they will be included in your resource go file already. 
```

> ###CustomizeDiff

Author: ```suggestion
### CustomizeDiff
```

> The `tpgresource.DefaultProviderDeletionPolicy()` should be added to the CustomDiff attribute of a given resource's `*schema.Resource`. If no existing CustomizeDiff is present, the whole attribute should be added.

Author: ```suggestion
Add `tpgresource.DefaultProviderDeletionPolicy()` to the CustomDiff attribute of a given resource's `*schema.Resource`. If no existing CustomizeDiff is present, the whole attribute will need to be added.
```

```go
CustomizeDiff: customdiff.All(
            tpgresource.DefaultProviderDeletionPolicy("DELETE"),
        ),
```

> If the default is being changed, it should also be updated from "DELETE" here.

Author: ```suggestion
If the default is being changed, update it from "DELETE" here.
```

> ###Schema

Author: ```suggestion
### Schema
```

Add following to the top level schema of the resource:
```go
"deletion_policy": tpgresource.DeletionPolicySchemaEntry("DELETE"),
```

> If the default is being changed, it should also be updated from "DELETE" here.

Author: ```suggestion
If the default is being changed, update it from "DELETE" here.
```

> ###Read

Author: ```suggestion
### Read
```

Add the following to the end of a resource's Read() function:
```go
    if err := tpgresource.DeletionPolicyReadDefault(d, config, "DELETE"); err != nil {
        return err
    }
```

> If the default is being changed, it should also be updated from "DELETE" here.

Author: ```suggestion
If the default is being changed, update it from "DELETE" here.
```

> ###Update

Author: ```suggestion
### Update
```

Add the following to the start of a resource's Update() function:
```go
if tpgresource.DeletionPolicyPreUpdate(d, RESOURCENAME) {
    return RESOURCENAME().Read(d, meta)
}
```

> If the resource does not support updating, the implement the following Update() function for the resource:

Author: ```suggestion
If the resource does not support updating, implement the following Update() function for the resource:
```

```go
//UDP update start
func resourceRESOURCENAMEUpdate(d *schema.ResourceData, meta interface{}) error {
    // Only the root field "deletion_policy", "labels", "terraform_labels", and virtual fields are mutable
    return resourceRESOURCENAMERead(d, meta)
}
//UDP update end
```

> ###Delete

Author: ```suggestion
### Delete
```

Add following to the start of a resource's Delete() function, modifying as necessary for what custom values are supported:
```go
if ok, err := tpgresource.DeletionPolicyPreDelete(d); err != nil{
    return err
}else if ok{
    return nil
}
```

> ###Metadata

Author: ```suggestion
### Metadata
```

Add following line to the resource's meta.yaml:
```yaml
- field: 'deletion_policy'
  provider_only: true
```

> ###Docs

Author: ```suggestion
### Docs
```
